
Elsevier logo
Journals & Books

Help
Search
My account

You have institutional Access via Zhejiang University Library

Download full issue
Outline
Abstract
Graphical abstract
Keywords
1. Introduction
2. Results
3. Discussion
4. Materials and methods
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Declaration of competing interest
Acknowledgements
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Data availability
References

Show full outline
Cited by (32)
Figures (7)
Unlabelled figure
Fig. 1. Effect of lipid carrier, administration route and inclusion of αGC on mRNA…
Fig. 2. Low dose of αGC in mRNA LNPs activates iNKT cells in draining lymph node after…
Fig. 3. The effect of including signal peptides and endocytic sorting signals in the…
Fig. 4. Role of type of ionizable lipid in mRNA-LNPs (with or without αGC)on mRNA…
Fig. 5. Antitumor potential of C12–200 or SM-102 mRNA LNPs with or without in αGC in…

Show 1 more figure
Extras (1)
Supplementary material
Elsevier
Journal of Controlled Release
Volume 370, June 2024, Pages 379-391
Journal of Controlled Release
Alpha-galactosylceramide improves the potency of mRNA LNP vaccines against cancer and intracellular bacteria
Author links open overlay panel
Sofie Meulewaeter a b 1
, 
Ilke Aernout a b 1
, 
Joke Deprez c
, 
Yanou Engelen a b
, 
Margo De Velder a b
, 
Lorenzo Franceschini d
, Karine Breckpot d, Serge Van Calenbergh e, 
Caroline Asselman f g
, 
Katie Boucher f g h
, Francis Impens f g h, Stefaan C. De Smedt a b, 
Rein Verbeke a b
, Ine Lentacker a b

Show more

Add to Mendeley

Share

Cite
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2024.04.052
Get rights and content
Under a Creative Commons license
Open access
Abstract
Although various types of mRNA-based vaccines have been explored, the optimal conditions for induction of both humoral and cellular immunity remain rather unknown. In this study, mRNA vaccines of nucleoside-modified mRNA in lipoplexes (LPXs) or lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) were evaluated after administration in mice through different routes, assessing mRNA delivery, tolerability and immunogenicity. In addition, we investigated whether mRNA vaccines could benefit from the inclusion of the adjuvant alpha-galactosylceramide (αGC), an invariant Natural Killer T (iNKT) cell ligand. Intramuscular (IM) vaccination with ovalbumin (OVA)-encoding mRNA encapsulated in LNPs adjuvanted with αGC showed the highest antibody- and CD8+ T cell responses. Furthermore, we observed that addition of signal peptides and endocytic sorting signals of either LAMP1 or HLA-B7 in the OVA-encoding mRNA sequence further enhanced CD8+ T cell activation although reducing the induction of IgG antibody responses. Moreover, mRNA LNPs with the ionizable lipidoid C12–200 exhibited higher pro-inflammatory- and reactogenic activity compared to mRNA LNPs with SM-102, correlating with increased T cell activation and antitumor potential. We also observed that αGC could further enhance the cellular immunity of clinically relevant mRNA LNP vaccines, thereby promoting therapeutic antitumor potential. Finally, a Listeria monocytogenes mRNA LNP vaccine supplemented with αGC showed synergistic protective effects against listeriosis, highlighting a key advantage of co-activating iNKT cells in antibacterial mRNA vaccines. Taken together, our study offers multiple insights for optimizing the design of mRNA vaccines for disease applications, such as cancer and intracellular bacterial infections.
Graphical abstract
Unlabelled Image
Download: Download high-res image (137KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Lipid nanoparticleLipoplexmRNA vaccineNKT cellα-GalactosylceramideModified nucleotidesCancerIntracellular bacteriaRoute of administration
1. Introduction
As demonstrated by the success of Comirnaty (BNT162b2) and Spikevax (mRNA-1273) during the COVID-19 pandemic, mRNA-based vaccines have established themselves as next-generation vaccines [1,2]. Importantly, mRNA vaccines have potential applications beyond prophylaxis of viral infections. For decades, mRNA vaccines have been extensively studied as a therapeutic modality in cancer and their development recently reached a milestone with the initiation of Phase III clinical trials evaluating Moderna's vaccine candidate (mRNA-4157) as treatment for patients with resected lung cancer and melanoma in combination with immune checkpoint therapy [3,4]. In addition, BioNTech received fast track designation by the FDA for its mRNA cancer vaccine candidate (BNT111) in advanced melanoma [5]. Another frontier is to design mRNA vaccines against bacterial pathogens for which there is an urgent need to develop more effective vaccines, in particular due to increasing antimicrobial resistance [6].
In contrast to prophylactic vaccines for viral infections that necessitate neutralizing antibody formation, these applications are predominantly focused on the induction of cellular immunity capable of killing malignant cells or host cells infected with intracellular bacteria. Regarding clinically-advanced mRNA vaccines for cancer, various approaches are currently being explored with differences in e.g. modifications of the mRNA molecule, the vaccination route, and the type of carrier [7]. Particularly lipid-based nanocarriers have been reported for the delivery of mRNA vaccines, which can be sub-divided into two broad categories: (i) lipoplexes (LPXs) have a multilayered structure and are formed upon complexation of liposomes containing cationic lipids with mRNA and (ii) lipid nanoparticles (LNPs), which have an amorphous structure and are composed of an ionizable lipid and helper lipids. LNPs are positively charged at low pH enabling mRNA encapsulation, but remain neutral at physiological pH. Moderna's vaccine mRNA-4157 consists of an LNP-encapsulated, N1-methylpseudouridine (m1Ψ)-modified mRNA vaccine administered intramuscularly (IM) [8]. BioNTech's cancer vaccine platform consists of an unmodified mRNA LPX and is administered intravenously (IV) [9]. Notably, the delivery of m1Ψ-modified mRNA with BioNTech's LPX system was considered noninflammatory instead and was found to have capacity of inducing regulatory T cells [10]. The impact of nucleoside-modification on the immune response to mRNA vaccines has been studied before [11,12], but only a limited number of studies have reported on head-to-head comparisons between LNPs and LPXs for mRNA vaccine delivery, or have investigated how the administration route impacts their overall performance [[13], [14], [15], [16]]. A better understanding of the complex interplay between these variables that can influence the capacity of the vaccine to evoke different types of immune responses, may enable tailoring mRNA vaccine design to specific therapeutic applications, e.g. to select an optimal mRNA vaccine approach for cellular immunity.
Another interesting strategy to further strengthen and broaden the immune response upon mRNA vaccination is to include immune adjuvants. In previous work, we described the design of an adjuvanted mRNA vaccine platform by including the glycolipid alpha-galactosylceramide (αGC) in cationic liposomes that were complexed with nucleoside-modified mRNA [17]. While the cellular immunity upon IV administration of nucleoside-modified mRNA LPXs was limited or undetectable, we found that innate and cellular adaptive immune responses could be strongly empowered by the addition of low doses of αGC. Unlike most immune adjuvants that trigger specific pattern recognition receptors, αGC exerts its adjuvant activity by functioning as a glycolipid antigen for invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells [18,19]. Upon activation, these innate-like T cells rapidly secrete large amounts of cytokines, thereby contributing to the recruitment and activation of other innate and adaptive immune cells, such as dendritic cells (DCs), macrophages, NK cells, T cells, and B cells [20]. Moreover, iNKT cells can also exert direct cytotoxicity [21] (e.g. to infected cells and tumor cells) and affect the microenvironment in infectious diseases and cancer by modulating myeloid cells with immunosuppressive properties [[22], [23], [24]].
The current set of experiments was designed to characterize the impact of lipid formulation (LNPs versus LPXs) and administration route on the elicited immunity utilizing antigen encoding, m1Ψ-modified mRNA. Concurrently, we investigated whether co-encapsulation of αGC as adjuvant could enhance and shape antigen-specific immune responses across different lipid carriers and routes of administration. To this end, we initially compared the delivery efficiency and immunogenicity of a cationic DOTAP LPX formulation with an LNP system containing the ionizable lipidoid C12–200. These delivery systems encapsulated either nucleoside-modified mRNA alone or in combination with αGC and were administered through various routes in mice. We also evaluated whether incorporating signal peptides and endocytic sorting motifs in the mRNA sequence could further enhance the presentation of expressed antigens and contribute to their immunogenicity. Next, we conducted a benchmarking study, comparing LNPs with the C12–200 lipid to clinically relevant LNPs with the ionizable lipid SM-102 (used in SpikeVax and mRNA-4157) [25,26], as recent studies have pointed towards a prominent role of the ionizable lipid in the innate immune response to mRNA-LNPs [27]. Finally, we investigated whether incorporating αGC into nucleoside-modified mRNA-LNP vaccines could enhance mRNA vaccine potency in two distinct vaccine and disease settings: first a therapeutic vaccine in the B16 melanoma tumor model and second a prophylactic vaccine in the Listeria monocytogenes bacterial infection model.
2. Results
2.1. Impact of administration route, lipid carrier and αGC incorporation on mRNA vaccine performance
We initially evaluated the immunogenicity of two different lipid carriers previously studied for mRNA vaccine delivery: LPXs and LNPs. In this study, cationic liposomes were composed of the cationic lipid DOTAP and cholesterol at 40:60 mol% ratio, and mRNA LPXs were formed after complexation of the mRNA at a cationic lipid-to-mRNA (N/P) ratio of 3. The LNP system contained the ionizable lipidoid C12–200 and helper lipids 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DSPC), cholesterol and 1,2-dimyristoyl-rac-glycero-3-methoxypolyethylene glycol-2000 (DMG-PEG2000) at 50:10:38.5:1.5 mol% ratio. mRNA LNPs were formulated at a C12–200:mRNA weight ratio of 10 using an automated T-junction mixing device. Physicochemical characteristics of the lipid formulations are shown in supplementary Table 1. Based on earlier findings from our group [17], we also investigated whether co-encapsulating αGC as a potential adjuvant could empower the mRNA vaccine's capacity to induce antibody- and T cell responses; this was achieved by replacing 0.015 to 0.02 mol% of the total lipid content in DOTAP mRNA LPXs and C12–200 mRNA LNPs, respectively, with αGC, ensuring equal dosing of αGC using both lipid formulations.
First, we measured the mRNA delivery efficiency of these two lipid formulations by means of a firefly luciferase-reporter mRNA (Fig. S1A-C) after IV, IM or subcutaneous (SC) administration in C57BL/6 mice. Four hours post-injection, DOTAP mRNA LPXs showed luciferase expression in the lungs upon IV delivery, while local delivery of these lipid particles by IM or SC administration did not result in detectable expression levels.
Upon IV delivery of C12–200 mRNA LNPs, high luciferase expression was observed in the circulation and systemic organs with a predominant expression in the spleen, followed by the liver. In contrast to DOTAP mRNA LPXs, high luciferase activity was obtained at the injection site after IM or SC administration of C12–200 mRNA-LNPs with also detectable mRNA expression in draining lymph nodes. In addition, we studied the kinetics and durability of mRNA expression upon IM administration (Fig. S1D). The highest expression was measured at 4 h post administration followed by a gradual decrease but retaining detectable levels up to two days after administration.
While the LPXs only enabled mRNA delivery via the systemic route, the use of LNPs allowed us to compare the immune responses elicited following the different routes of administration. Mice received one or two vaccine doses of DOTAP LPXs or C12–200 LNPs containing 10 μg of m1Ψ-modified mRNA encoding full length ovalbumin (OVA) with 14 days between injections (Fig. 1A). Two weeks after the second immunization, high titers of anti-OVA IgG1-and anti-OVA IgG2c were detected in plasma of mice immunized with C12–200 mRNA LNPs. Inclusion of the αGC adjuvant contributed to higher anti-OVA IgG1 titers showing approximately a threefold increase, but this effect was only observed after IM immunization. For the IgG2c subclass, there was no significant impact when αGC was included in C12–200 mRNA LNPs and highest anti-OVA IgG2c titers were seen after IM injection. In contrast, DOTAP mRNA LPXs were not capable of inducing antibody responses after systemic delivery (Fig. 1B-C).
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (566KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. Effect of lipid carrier, administration route and inclusion of αGC on mRNA vaccine's performance. (A) C57BL/6 mice were immunized IV, IM or SC with a single prime dose, or a prime-boost dose (two weeks interval) of m1Ψ-modified mRNA encoding full length OVA formulated in DOTAP LPXs or C12–200 mRNA LNPs alone (10 μg mRNA/mice) or co-formulated with αGC adjuvant (low dose of 30 ng/mice) (n = 5). Adaptive responses against the OVA antigen were measured two weeks after prime-, or two weeks after prime-boost vaccination. (B) Anti-OVA IgG1 and (C) anti-OVA IgG2c antibody responses were determined by ELISA in blood plasma collected two weeks after boost vaccination. (D-E) OVA-specific CD8+ T cells in spleen were measured after re-stimulating splenocytes with the OVA-derived peptide SIINFEKL for 6 h, followed by an intracellular cytokine staining to detect IFN-gamma producing cells in the CD8+ T cell population, (F-G) or directly using an H-2Kb OVA tetramer staining. (H) To study dose-sparing effects of αGC for the induction of CD8+ T cell responses, C57BL/6 mice were immunized IM with a lower mRNA dose of 5.0 μg, 2.5 μg, 0.5 μg or 0.05 μg OVA-mRNA formulated in LNPs alone or co-formulated with αGC adjuvant. OVA-specific CD8+ T cells in spleen were identified using an H-2Kb OVA tetramer 14 days after prime dose vaccination. Statistical analyses on the effect of route of administration on the immunogenicity of C12–200 mRNA LNPs with αGC was performed by one-Way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post hoc test. To analyze adjuvant activities of αGC, mean values of animals immunized with either mRNA-LNPs containing αGC or mRNA-LNPs alone were compared using unpaired t-tests. (I) Cytokine responses induced by C12–200 mRNA LNPs versus DOTAP mRNA LPXs, both adjuvanted with αGC, 4 h after IV, IM or SC injection. P values determined by two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post-hoc test.

In addition, we examined antigen-specific CD8+ T cell response with an H-2Kb OVA tetramer staining or after restimulation of splenocytes with the OVA-derived epitope SIINFEKL. Two weeks after prime immunization, there was a trend towards higher OVA-specific CD8+ T cell responses in animals vaccinated with C12–200 mRNA LNPs over DOTAP mRNA LPXs (Fig. 1D&F). Intriguingly, when measured at 7 days post-injection the CD8+ T cell response was higher for DOTAP LPXs (Supplementary Fig. S2), which suggests differences in the expansion and contraction of CD8+ T cells elicited by the two lipid formulations. CD8+ T cells experienced a robust boost after the second vaccine dose in mice vaccinated with C12–200 mRNA LNPs, whereas levels of OVA-specific- and IFN-ɣ producing CD8+ T cells remained unchanged following IV administration of DOTAP mRNA LPXs (Fig. 1E&G). A substantial contribution of αGC to the CD8+ T cell response was seen when C12–200 mRNA LNPs were IM administered (i.e. 50-to-100% increase), while there were no differences observed after IV administration of the same LNPs. For the SC route, CD8+ T cell frequencies were initially low after boost vaccination, but significantly increased (i.e. 5-fold) when αGC was included. We also compared the acute cytokine response upon administration of C12–200 mRNA LNPs with DOTAP mRNA LPXs, both in the combination with αGC (Fig. 1I). Cytokines were clearly detected in plasma after IV delivery of DOTAP mRNA LPXs, but not upon local administration. In contrast, C12–200 mRNA LNPs induced the highest levels of IL-6 after IM injection, whereas the amounts of MCP-1, TNF-α and IFN-γ were the highest after IV administration (Fig. 1I). Notably, IL-10, an immunosuppressive cytokine, was only detected after IV administration.
Based on these results, we selected C12–200 mRNA LNPs and IM administration as the preferred immunization strategy and performed a dose-reduction study. To this end, C12–200 mRNA LNPs, alone or including αGC, were IM administered at mRNA doses of 5 μg, 2.5 μg, 0.5 μg or 0.05 μg. Two weeks after prime immunization, the frequency of OVA specific CD8+ T cells was again determined for the different doses (Fig. 1H). In the absence of αGC, a dose-dependent induction of OVA-specific CD8+ T cells was observed, with a barely noticeable response at the 0.5 μg dose level. In contrast, αGC inclusion, induced robust CD8+ T cell responses even at mRNA doses as low as 0.5 μg. Importantly, this indicates a dose-sparing effect of the αGC adjuvant for inducing CD8+ T cell immunity.
Altogether, these findings demonstrate that IM administration of C12–200 mRNA LNPs supplemented with αGC provided the highest adaptive immune response. Moreover, we demonstrated that the iNKT-cell agonist αGC can exert adjuvant activity for mRNA LNPs, when administered by the IM route, showing dose-sparing effects for the induction of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells.
2.2. Nucleoside-modified mRNA LNPs with αGC induces iNKT cell responses in draining lymph nodes and spleen following intramuscular administration
To further study the impact of αGC on the evoked immunity, we measured the early cytokine production in response to C12–200 mRNA LNPs in combination of αGC, or mRNA alone. mRNA LNPs alone induced a robust production of IL-6 and MCP-1 at 4 h post-injection. In contrast, the direct cytokine response to αGC-loaded mRNA LNPs was characterized by higher levels of IL-6 and MCP-1, accompanied by a highly significant but transient increase of distinct cytokines, including IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-2, IL-22, IL-4 and IL-17 A (Fig. 2A).
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (508KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Low dose of αGC in mRNA LNPs activates iNKT cells in draining lymph node after IM injection and drives an early cytokine production. C57BL/6 mice received IM a single dose of m1Ψ-modified mRNA encoding full length OVA formulated in C12–200 LNPs (10 μg mRNA/mice), either without αGC or adjuvanted with αGC (30 ng). (A) Four hours or 24 h post-injection, plasma was collected and screened for the release of relevant cytokines: IL-6 and MCP-1, IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-2, IL-22, IL-4, and IL-17 A. P values determined by two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post-hoc test. (B) 72 h post-injection, iNKT cell frequencies within viable cells were measured in the draining inguinal lymph node and spleen. (C) iNKT cells were also stained for the activation marker programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1). (D) Representative flow plots of iNKT cells (TCRβ+, mCD1d PBS-57+ cells). P values determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post-hoc test.

Furthermore, we analysed iNKT cell responses in spleen and draining lymph node. As evident from the graphs in Fig. 2B and representative flow plots in Fig. 2D, the frequency of iNKT cells increased at least 3-fold by 72 h in the draining lymph nodes of mice vaccinated with αGC-adjuvanted C12–200 mRNA LNPs. While iNKT cell levels were not elevated in the spleen, we observed an increase in expression of the activation marker, programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) by splenic iNKT cells upon vaccination with αGC-supplemented LNPs (Fig. 2C).These data are indicative of an enhanced and broader innate immune activation when αGC is included in the mRNA LNP formulation, potentially driven by the activation of iNKT cells.
2.3. Optimization of mRNA design with endocytic sorting motif regions to boost cellular immunity
Previous studies have shown that MHC-I and MHC-II presentation of mRNA-encoded antigens by DCs can be increased by including signal peptides and endocytic sorting motifs of endosomal or lysosomal transmembrane proteins in the mRNA construct [28,29]. More specifically, these trafficking signals can affect the processing and transportation of the encoded antigen in the transfected host cell, e.g. by routing the expressed proteins to the endolysosomal pathway. The use of endocytic sorting motifs originates from the viral vector vaccine field but was also shown to strengthen antigen specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses in the context of DC vaccines when autologous DCs were electroporated with naked mRNA [28,29].
We constructed different forms of OVA-mRNA and compared their immunogenicity, in order to select for a most optimal mRNA design to achieve cellular immunity; (i) mRNA encoding full length OVA (as used in previous experiments), (ii) a truncated and non-secreted variant of OVA (tOVA), (iii) tOVA flanked by the signal peptide (SP) and the HLA class II sorting signal of the human lysosomal associated membrane protein 1 (LAMP1), and (iv) tOVA flanked by SP and the human MHC class I trafficking domain (transmembrane and cytosolic domain) of HLA-B7 (MITD) (Fig. 3A). From this experiment onwards, the mRNA LNP formulation was slightly altered to allow long-term frozen storage [30] and a dose of 2.5 μg mRNA was IM administered.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (224KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. The effect of including signal peptides and endocytic sorting signals in the mRNA sequence design on vaccine-induced adaptive immunity. (A) C12–200 mRNA LNPs were formulated with different m1Ψ-modified OVA-mRNA constructs; (i) full length OVA, (ii) truncated (t)OVA, (iii) tOVA conjugated to signal peptide (SP) and HLA class II sorting signal of LAMP1, or (iv) tOVA conjugated to SP and the MHC class I trafficking domain (MITD) of HLA-B7. The different OVA-mRNA constructs were compared for their capacity to induce (B) OVA specific CD8 T cell responses, (C) anti-OVA IgG1 and (D) anti-OVA IgG2c responses measured two weeks after a prime-boost vaccination with 2.5 μg mRNA IM at an interval of two weeks. Statistical analyses were performed by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post hoc test, or by unpaired t-test to evaluate the contribution of αGC within LNPs formulated with the same OVA-mRNA construct.

Higher OVA-CD8+ T cell responses were detected in mice vaccinated with SP-tOVA-LAMP1 mRNA (22.8 ± 6.4%) and SP-tOVA-MITD mRNA (17.0 ± 6.2%) compared to mRNA-encoding full-length OVA (12.2 ± 4.0%). In these conditions, we also evaluated the impact of the incorporation of αGC in LNPs, which showed higher OVA specific T cell frequencies compared to mRNA LNPs without αGC (32.5 ± 9.4% and 29.7 ± 8.1%, for SP-tOVA-LAMP1 and SP-tOVA-MITD, respectively).
With respect to humoral immunity, vaccination with mRNA LNPs containing full-length OVA resulted in more robust anti-OVA IgG1 and -IgG2c responses than the SP-tOVA-LAMP1 and SP-tOVA-MITD groups, whereas no antibody responses were measured in the tOVA group. Interestingly, the incorporation of αGC in LNPs also enhanced the humoral immunity to LNPs containing SP-tOVA-LAMP1 and SP-tOVA-MITD mRNA.
2.4. Type of ionizable lipid impacts the pro-inflammatory cytokine response to mRNA LNP vaccines
We further investigated whether the αGC adjuvant can also improve the performance of a clinically approved LNP. We therefore chose to compare the optimized C12–200 mRNA LNPs with the LNP formulation used in Moderna's proprietary LNP containing the ionizable lipid SM-102. Physicochemical properties of the LNP formulations can again be found in Supplementary Table 1; of note mRNA LNPs formulated with SM-102 were considerably smaller in size (reported as number mean; 48.1 nm) compared to C12–200 mRNA LNPs (108.5 nm).
We first studied the mRNA delivery efficiency in mice and found that LNPs containing C12–200 showed a slightly higher transfection efficiency than SM-102 mRNA LNPs. Both mRNA LNPs showed luciferase expression at the injection site, in draining lymph nodes, liver and spleen. No differences in mRNA delivery efficiencies were seen between mRNA LNPs with and without inclusion of the αGC adjuvant (Fig. 4A and B).
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (712KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. Role of type of ionizable lipid in mRNA-LNPs (with or without αGC)on mRNA delivery efficiency and pro-inflammatory cytokine responses. Mice were IM administered with LNPs composed with C12–200 or SM-102 as ionizable lipid with m1Ψ-modified mRNA encoding the reporter luciferase gene at an mRNA dose of 2.5 μg supplemented with or without αGC. (A-B) Luciferase expression levels measured via bioluminescence imaging 6 h post injection with representative images. (C) Pro-inflammatory cytokine responses detected in blood plasma collected 6 h post injection. P values determined by two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post-hoc test.

Since the ionizable lipid SM-102 was selected by Moderna based on its improved tolerability and degradability [25], we were also interested in comparing the direct cytokine responses to SM-102 LNPs versus C12–200 LNPs. The induction of cytokine responses was measured after an IM injection of 2.5 μg mRNA LNPs with or without αGC, as well as a similar lipid dose of empty LNPs. We observed a marked increase in IL-6 in animals vaccinated with empty C12–200 LNP, which further increased in the presence of mRNA, and in the combination of mRNA and αGC. In contrast, SM-102 LNP was significantly less potent in inducing IL-6, resulting in cytokine levels approximately 10 times lower than with the C12–200 LNP counterpart. Addition of αGC in the mRNA LNPs further increased the production of MCP-1 and IFN-γ, but not IL-6. Note that the differences in cytokine levels between data presented in Fig. 2A and Fig. 4C for the C12–200 formulation can be potentially explained by the lower amount of mRNA that was used in this study (2.5 μg versus 10 μg dose) and the changes in both C12–200 LNP formulation (20 versus 10 weight ratio) and mRNA construct (CleanCap AG versus ARCA) based on earlier findings in this paper. To conclude, these data indicate that the type of ionizable lipid is a critical determinant for the magnitude of the pro-inflammatory cytokine response to mRNA LNP vaccines.
2.5. Contribution of αGC to the antitumor potential of mRNA LNP vaccines in OVA-expressing B16F0 melanoma model
We aimed to investigate whether the adjuvant activities of αGC on the T cell response upon mRNA vaccination could enhance antitumor immunity in an OVA-expressing B16F0 melanoma model. Therefore, we conducted a therapeutic vaccination study using the OVA construct, SP-tOVA-MITD, formulated in C12–200 LNPs with and without inclusion of αGC. We also included the comparison with SM-102 formulated LNPs, as this mRNA-LNP formulation is currently also clinically evaluated by Moderna as a therapeutic vaccine formulation for lung cancer and melanoma.
Mice were SC inoculated with B16F0-OVA melanoma cells and vaccinated IM with 2.5 μg of mRNA at day 8 when tumors were palpable, followed by a second vaccination at day 15 (Fig. 5A). As we had to reduce the prime-boost interval by one week in this experiment because of the narrow therapeutic window of vaccination in B16 melanoma, we first evaluated whether this immunization schedule would affect the cellular immunogenicity for the different mRNA vaccines in healthy mice (i.e. non tumor-bearing mice). Seven days after boost dose (day 21), we found a higher level of IFN-γ producing CD8+ T cells in animals that received C12–200 mRNA LNPs over SM-102 mRNA LNPs, with a significant difference found between C12–200 mRNA LNPs with αGC and SM-102 mRNA LNPs without αGC (Fig. 5B). However, in contrast to our previous data obtained with the 14-days interval (Fig. 3), we could not observe a statistically significant contribution of αGC to the cellular response of C12–200 formulated mRNA LNPs. With regards to indicative signs of reactogenicity, healthy mice vaccinated with C12–200 mRNA LNPs showed a higher temporal reduction in body weight 24 h post prime and boost injection (∼9% and ∼ 6%) than in the SM-102 mRNA LNP group (∼2% and ∼ 4%). Together with the pro-inflammatory cytokine data shown in Fig. 4C, this suggests for a higher systemic reactogenicity of the C12–200 lipid over SM-102. We also noted that there was no additive reactogenic effect of αGC (Fig. 5C).
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (401KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Antitumor potential of C12–200 or SM-102 mRNA LNPs with or without in αGC in B16F0-OVA melanoma bearing mice. (A) Mice were subcutaneously inoculated with B16F0-OVA cells (3 × 105cells) and were vaccinated on day 8 when tumors were clearly visible, followed by a boost dose on day 15. Evaluation of the (B) cellular immunogenicity (IFN-γ producing CD8+ T cells) and (C) The reactogenicity, determined by body weight change, of C12–200 or SM-102 formulated mRNA LNPs, with or without αGC, was measured in healthy mice. (D) Graphs show the individual tumor growth curves as a function of time. (E) Table with the median survival time of B16F0-OVA bearing mice treated with the different mRNA vaccines. The statistical analysis was performed by two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post-hoc test (B), or by log-rank (Mantel−Cox) test (E).

In a therapeutic setting, two vaccinations with the different mRNA LNPs significantly reduced tumor growth compared to untreated animals, leading to a prolongation of survival until the humane endpoint was reached, defined as a tumor volume of 1000mm3. A slightly lower antitumor potential was seen for SM-102 mRNA LNPs without αGC versus the other vaccines (median survival of 27 days versus 31.5 days), which is in line with the analysis of the cellular immunogenicity measured in healthy mice. These data suggest that LNPs with C12–200 have improved cancer vaccine's potency to elicit cytotoxic CD8+ T cells and eventually, to achieve superior antitumor effects over LNPs with SM-102, albeit with the cost of lower tolerability. Importantly, αGC showed potential to increase the antitumor effect of SM-102 mRNA LNPs.
2.6. Inclusion of αGC contributes to the protective effects induced by an mRNA LNP vaccine for Listeria monocytogenes
Here, we evaluated the potential of αGC-adjuvanted C12–200 mRNA LNPs as a prophylactic vaccine against Listeria monocytogenes. Listeria is a foodborne intracellular bacterial pathogen capable of causing severe disease in mice and humans (i.e. listeriosis). While human listeriosis is not a very common type of acute infection, it is typically used as a model to study innate and adaptive immunity against intracellular bacterial infections [31,32]. Since protective immunity against Listeria mainly depends on cytotoxic instead of antibody responses, it is an interesting infection model to functionally assess the capacity of vaccines to induce cytotoxic CD8+ T cells [33].
Healthy mice were vaccinated IM twice (on day 1 and day 14) with C12–200 mRNA LNPs alone, or supplemented with αGC, both containing m1Ψ-modified mRNA encoding the full-length Listeria antigen, LMON_0149. We recently identified this poorly characterized oligopeptide transporter protein as immunodominant Listeria protein and promising vaccine candidate by mass spectrometry based immunopeptidomics [34]. mRNA LNP formulations containing OVA as an irrelevant antigen and PBS were included as negative controls in this study to elucidate the potential immunostimulatory effect of the mRNA-LNP formulations without a pathogen-related antigen. Mice that received a low dose of Listeria. monocytogenes EGD (5 × 104 bacteria) IV were included as a positive control. These low-dose pre-infections result in acute listeriosis that is easily overcome by the animals, leading to the development of protective immunity, including induction of CD8+ T cell-mediated protection [32]. Two weeks after second vaccination, mice were challenged IV with a lethal dose of Listeria monocytogenes EGD (7.5 × 105 bacteria) and 72 h later, spleen and liver were harvested to determine the infection level. Fig. 6B and C illustrate the bacterial load (colony-forming units, CFU) in the liver and spleen of Listeria-challenged mice, respectively. Vaccination with LMON_0149 mRNA LNPs resulted a ∼ 1 log reduction of bacterial load in liver and spleen, while inclusion of αGC further suppressed bacterial levels up to ∼3 logs in liver and a ∼ 1.5 to 2 log in spleen, reaching almost similar levels of protection as the pre-infected mice. Interestingly, OVA mRNA LNPs did not significantly reduce the bacterial load compared to the PBS control, however inclusion of the αGC adjuvant was sufficient to reduce the bacterial load with ∼0.5 to 1 log. These results indicate that activation of iNKT cells by the αGC adjuvant contributes to the protection against Listeria, thus suggesting that αGC-activated iNKT cells can provide additive, or even synergistic protective immunological mechanisms against infection with (intracellular) bacterial pathogens.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (341KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Incorporation of αGC in a nucleoside-modified mRNA-LNP based Listeria vaccine drastically increases the protection against listeria infection. (A) C57BL/6 mice were IM vaccinated with a prime-boost regime (14 days interval) with 2 μg m1Ψ modified mRNA encoding a newly discovered listeria protein antigen (lmon_0149) formulated in C12–200 LNPs alone or co-formulated with αGC adjuvant. The injection of PBS was included as negative control, while 2× low-dose infections with Listeria monocytogenes EGD (5 × 104 CFUs) was included as positive control mimicking natural immune responses against infection. Mice vaccinated with 2 μg OVA-mRNA formulated in C12–200 LNPs alone, or co-formulated with αGC adjuvant were included as additional controls to evaluate antigen-independent immune effects. Two weeks after boost dose vaccination, the animals were challenged by IV injection of a lethal dose of 7.5 × 105 bacteria. Mice were euthanized 72 h post-challenge, after which the bacterial load in spleen and liver was assessed by counting colony-forming units (CFU) via serial dilution and replating. Bar charts depicting the number of CFUs in liver (B) and spleen (C). Statistical analysis was done using Brown–Forsythe and Welch ANOVA tests followed by Tamhane's T1 multiple comparisons test. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

3. Discussion
Several studies have shown the versatility of mRNA vaccines to elicit different types of immune responses. However, the differences in evoked immunity and therapeutic outcomes that can be obtained with different mRNA vaccines are difficult to interpret. This study primarily aimed to find an optimal mRNA vaccine design for the induction of robust cellular immunity, which is of particular relevance for the development of mRNA vaccines for cancer treatment and for prophylaxis against intracellular bacterial diseases. To this end, we investigated the impact of several vaccine parameters on the performance of m1Ψ-modified mRNA vaccines, including lipid carrier, route of administration, mRNA construct design, and inclusion of the iNKT cell agonist αGC as a potential immune adjuvant.
We found that administration of m1Ψ-modified mRNA formulated in the C12–200 LNP system enabled efficient mRNA expression, independent of the route of administration. In contrast, cationic DOTAP liposomes showed drastically lower efficiency for mRNA delivery when administered IV, while protein expression was practically absent upon IM or SC administration. This was also reflected in the immunogenic profile of the two lipid formulations; C12–200 LNPs induced robust antibody formation and cellular immunity after prime-boost immunization, whereas we noticed an absence of humoral immunity and only very low T cell responses after IV injection of DOTAP LPXs. This is in correspondence with Hassett et al. mentioning the lack of delivery efficiency and antibody responses after injection of m1Ψ-modified mRNA LPXs through the IM route [25]. The tropism of cationic mRNA LPXs to the lungs after IV delivery was recently associated with blood clotting, causing the deposition of aggregates of nanoparticles with fibrinogen in the pulmonary vasculature [35]. BioNTech is currently using similar liposomal mRNA vaccines in their clinical cancer studies, although it is important to stress that BioNTech vaccines contain unmodified mRNA LPXs and are formulated with a different N/P ratio, resulting in a negative net charge of the LPXs. The latter has shown to improve targeting of the mRNA particles to macrophages and DCs in spleen and lymph nodes [36].
In addition to studying the role of lipid carrier and administration route, we found that the inclusion of small amounts of the glycolipid αGC increased the potency of m1Ψ-modified mRNA LNPs to induce cellular immunity and showed a dose-reduction potential. However, we found that the effect of αGC on the activity of mRNA vaccines to elicit CD8+ T cells was dependent on the route of administration and vaccination regimen. This finding is consistent with literature showing that the route of administration may influence the nature of iNKT cell response induced by glycolipids, as there might be differences in biodistribution and cellular uptake, as well as in the iNKT cell subsets that will interact with the cells that in our case internalize the mRNA LNPs, and eventually present αGC [[37], [38], [39]]. In a previous study, we found that iNKT cells showed impaired proliferation and reduced production of Th1 cytokines following secondary activation with IV-administered mRNA LPXs loaded with αGC, which could be prevented by co-injection of anti-PD-L1 antibodies [17]. This phenomenon often referred to as iNKT cell anergy is thought to be caused by long-term phenotypical changes in iNKT cells following strong- or chronic antigenic stimulation, including the enrichment of IL-10 producing iNKT cells that counter-regulate other effector iNKT subsets, thereby preventing overactivation [40,41]. In another recent study, we visualized a rapid and systemic upregulation of PD-L1 after IV administration of mRNA LPXs adjuvanted with αGC using a technetium-99m-labeled anti-PD-L1 nanobody for single-photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT) and X-ray computed tomography (CT) imaging [42]. Based on the discrepancies we observed in cytokine induction, especially in the production of the immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10, we hypothesize that iNKT cells experienced “overstimulation” upon systemic administration, but not upon local administration of the first dose of αGC-adjuvanted mRNA LNPs. In case of IV administration, this might have altered the iNKT cell response and have limited the boost effect of secondary vaccination on adaptive immune cells.
Through addition of signal peptides and endocytic sorting motifs of either LAMP1 or HLA-B7 in the OVA mRNA construct, we could further improve the CD8+ T cell response to IM-administered C12–200 mRNA LNPs. These trafficking signals have shown to guide expressed antigens into endo-lysosomal compartments harboring both MHC-I and MHC-II molecules, thereby improving antigen presentation to CD8+ and CD4+ T cells [28,29]. In contrast to the truncated OVA construct, we also found that there was induction of OVA-specific antibody responses with the SP-tOVA-LAMP1 and SP-tOVA-MITD constructs, albeit at lower levels than the native OVA secreted form. However, the mechanisms of how the antigen with these constructs is presented to B cells remains unknown, which could be in a secreted-, membrane-bound form or in secreted exosomes. In this regard, Kreiter et al. detected using an enhanced GFP (eGFP) mRNA flanked with SP and MITD, fluorescence signal in vacuolar compartments as well as staining of the cell surface membrane, whereas wild-type eGFP as expected displayed a diffuse cellular distribution [28].
iNKT cells have been shown to play a protective role in the immune response against bacterial infections [43], including Listeria monocytogenes [44,45]. Similar to other observations for the use of αGC in bacterial vaccine formats (e.g. Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) [46]), we found that αGC-adjuvanted mRNA LNPs outperformed the same LNP vaccine without αGC in providing protection against Listeria. In the context of malaria vaccine research, Galley et al. also recently demonstrated that αGC (or structural analogues of αGC) in an IV-administered mRNA LPX vaccine contributed to greater protection from plasmodium challenge [47]. Interestingly, the authors found that IL-4 production by activated iNKT cells played an essential role for promoting the induction of tissue resident memory T cells (Trms) in the liver. Future research could investigate whether the inclusion of αGC in mRNA LNPs enhances the formation of memory T cell subsets, including Trms.
A second finding of our study was that two immunizations with αGC-adjuvanted LNPs loaded with an irrelevant antigen-encoding mRNA already limited bacterial replication up to 10-fold, suggesting that activated iNKT cells by this vaccine also contributed to vaccine-induced protection by different mechanisms than only promoting the CD8+ T cell response. However, it remains to be elucidated if iNKT cells are directly responsible for this effect or if other immune cell types are involved in this acquired immunity, e.g. through bystander activation of NK cells or macrophages. Further investigation is also required to elucidate the phenotype of activated iNKT by αGC-adjuvanted LNPs, as well as the durability of their protective effects.
Recent studies indicated that the type of ionizable lipid in LNPs can impact on the immunogenicity and reactogenicity of mRNA vaccines [25,48]. Our studies benchmarking C12–200 LNPs against Moderna's proprietary lipid SM-102 showed a lower inflammatory activity and better tolerability for the latter, which was evident from lower cytokine induction and a less pronounced reduction in body weight following vaccination(s). With respect to immunogenicity, there was a trend towards higher CD8+ T cell induction with C12–200 mRNA LNPs in comparison to SM-102 mRNA LNPs, and vaccinations with C12–200 mRNA LNPs achieved a slightly better control of tumor growth in a therapeutic setting of B16 melanoma. Interestingly, we found that the addition of αGC increased the therapeutic efficacy of SM-102 mRNA LNPs; a vaccine platform currently evaluated by Moderna in Phase III clinical trials as treatment for melanoma and lung cancer when administered in combination with checkpoint inhibitors (mRNA-4157, NCT05933577, NCT06077760) [8,26]. Overall, our data are in line with other reports showing that the pro-inflammatory activity of mRNA LNPs depends on the type of ionizable lipid. Furthermore, our data indicate that the innate immune activation by mRNA LNPs seems to promote the induction of cellular immunity, but must be carefully balanced out with tolerability. As we did not notice significant effects of αGC on the vaccine's tolerability, we hypothesize that the incorporation of αGC in mRNA LNPs with low inflammation capacity might provide an attractive and safe approach to design more effective mRNA vaccines by triggering the innate immune system in a more controllable manner.
In conclusion, we demonstrate that LNPs containing ionizable lipids are superior over cationic liposomes for the delivery of m1Ψ-modified mRNA vaccines, with IM injection being the preferred route of administration. Moreover, we propose that the inclusion of αGC in LNPs may offer specific advantages for the development of mRNA vaccines against diseases that require robust cellular immunity and that may benefit from a broadened innate immune activation.
4. Materials and methods
4.1. mRNA constructs
In the first experiments, in vitro transcribed (IVT) messenger RNA (mRNA) encoding firefly luciferase and ovalbumin (OVA) was prepared from pBlue-Luc-A50 and pGEM4Z-OVA-A64 plasmid DNA, respectively. The pGEM4Z-SP-tOVA-LAMP1 and pLMCT-tsluc plasmids were kindly provided by Prof. K. Breckpot (Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium). The pGEM4Z-SP-tOVA-LAMP1 plasmid was further used as template for cloning the two other tOVA constructs, i.e. tOVA and SP-tOVA-MITD. More specifically using in silico PCR in human, sequences of SP and MITD were obtained using primers as described in Kreiter et al. [28]. By flanking the tOVA sequence with SP at the 5′ end and MITD at the 3′ end, gBlocks (Integrated DNA Technologies) for the different inserts were purchased from IDT and cloned into the pGEM4Z vector using the Gibson assembly kit (New England Biolabs [NEB]) as an NCoI and EcoRI fragment, resulting in pGEM4Z-tOVA-A64 and pGEM4Z-SP-tOVA-MITD-A64. The obtained sequences were verified through DNA sequencing (Eurofins Genomics). The protein sequence of the OppA lmon_0149 Listeria gene (Uniprot Acc. No. A0A3Q0NAQ5_LISMG) was cloned into a pGEM4Z-plasmid vector (Promega) containing a T7 promoter, 5′ and 3′ UTR of human β globulin, and a poly(A) tail by Genscript as described previously [34].
The plasmids were linearized using the appropriate restriction enzymes and purified using a QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherlands). Linearized plasmids were used as templates for the in vitro transcription reaction using the T7 MegaScript kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) including an Anti-Reverse Cap Analog (ARCA, Trilink BioTechnologies), and chemically modified N1-methylpseudouridine-5′-triphosphate (Jena Bioscience, Germany). mRNA transcribed from the pLMCT-tsluc plasmid was co-transcriptionally capped with Cleancap AG. Subsequently, poly A tails were elongated using a poly(A) Tailing kit ((Thermo Fisher Scientific). The resulting capped and poly-adenylated mRNAs were purified by DNase I digestion, precipitated with LiCl and washed with 70% ethanol. All mRNAs were analysed by agarose gel electrophoresis and concentrations were determined by measuring the absorbance at 260 nm.
4.2. Lipoplex and lipid nanoparticle formulation
DOTAP (1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane), cholesterol, DSPC (1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine), DMG-PEG 2000 (1,2-dimyristoyl-rac-glycero-3-methoxypolyethylene glycol-2000) were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids (Alabaster, USA). Alpha-galactosylceramide (αGC) was produced in house as previously described [17]. C12–200 and SM-102 were purchased from Corden Pharma (Plankstadt, Germany) and BroadPharm (San Diego, CA, USA), respectively. C12–200 and SM-102 LNPs containing mRNA were prepared via ethanol dilution using an automated T-junction mixing device [49]. Briefly, lipid components (ionizable lipid, DSPC, cholesterol, PEG-DMG) were dissolved in ethanol at a component molar ratio of ∼50/10/38.5/1.5 with a final concentration of 10 mM total lipid. mRNA was dissolved in 25 mM sodium acetate buffer at pH 4.0 to obtain a final C12–200:mRNA weight ratio of 20:1 or 10:1 as specified in the different experiments. For the LNP formulation with αGC, 0.01 or 0.02 mol% of the total lipid amount was replaced by αGC, depending on the C12–200:mRNA weight ratio. LNPs with SM-102 were formulated with mRNA at an ionizable lipid-to-mRNA (N/P) ratio of 6.
The organic and aqueous solutions were mixed at a flow ratio of 1:3 (v:v) and a total flow rate of 20 mL min. The resting suspension was dialyzed against a 1000-fold volume PBS or Tris buffer 9% sucrose at pH 7.4. Cationic liposomes of DOTAP-cholesterol (2:3 M ratio) were prepared by the thin-film hydration method as previously described [17]. The LNP and LPX formulations were subjected to a size and zeta potential quality control using a Malvern Zetasizer nano-ZS (Malvern Instruments Ltd., Worcestershire, UK). The Quant-iT RiboGreen RNA Assay was used to determine mRNA encapsulation and concentration according to manufacturer's protocols (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA). In order to release and detect the encapsulated mRNA content, mRNA particles were diluted in TE buffer containing 1% (v/v) Triton X-100 (Sigma) and incubated for 10 min at 37 °C, while the free (not-encapsulated) mRNA content was directly measured after particle dilution in TE buffer.
4.3. Administration of mRNA nanoparticles
Female C57BL/6 mice (6 weeks old) were purchased from Envigo (Gannat, France) or Charles River laboratories (France) and housed in an laboratory animal facility, following institutional guidelines. Mice were kept in controlled conditions (12 h/12 h light/dark cycle, temperature 21–24 °C, relative humidity 40–70%) and had access to food and water ad libitum. All animal experiments were conducted according to the regulations of the Belgian law and approved by the local Ethical Committee.
Before administration of mRNA-lipid formulations, C57BL/6 mice were anesthetized in a ventilated anaesthesia chamber with 3% isoflurane in oxygen at 0.5 l/min). Nanoparticles with the indicated cargo were injected either intravenously (IV) in the tail vain, intramuscularly (IM) in the caudal thigh muscle, or subcutaneously at the tail base (SC).
4.4. Bioluminescence imaging
At different time points after the injection of nanoparticles containing firefly luciferase-mRNA, mice were anesthetized and abdomen and chest were depilated with hair removal cream. Subsequently, VivoGlo™ Luciferin (Promega) was administered intraperitoneally in a volume of 100 μl (33 mg ml−1) per mouse. After 10 min, bioluminescence images were acquired by the IVIS lumina II system (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA) with an exposure time of 1 min.
4.5. Flow cytometric analysis of T cell- and iNKT cell responses
At different time points after immunization, mice were sacrificed and spleen, inguinal lymph nodes and lungs were harvested and processed into single-cell suspensions. Spleen and inguinal lymph nodes were gently pushed through a 40 μm cell strainer. After single cell suspensions were obtained, a red blood cell lysis step was performed using a red blood cell lysis buffer (BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA).
Single-cell suspensions were stained with either fixable viability dye eFluor 450 (Thermo-Scientific), Zombie Yellow (Biolegend) or LIVE/DEAD™ Fixable Aqua Dead Cell Stain Kit (Thermo-Scientific) according to the manufacturer's instructions to exclude dead cells from analysis, incubated with Fc block (CD16/32) to block nonspecific FcR binding (BioLegend), and surface stained with the indicated antibodies and tetramers during 30 min at 4 °C. After additional washing steps, samples were measured by a MACSQuant 16 flow cytometer (Miltenyi Biotec, Cologne, Germany) and analysed by FlowJo® software (BD Biosciences, Franklin lakes,NY, USA). Compensation for spectral overlap was calculated using UltraComp eBeads compensation beads (Thermo-Scientific) stained with individual fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies. T cells were stained with monoclonal antibodies, including CD3e-PE (145-2C11), CD4-FITC or APC (GK1.5), CD8a-APC (53–6.7). To stain OVA specific CD8+ T cells, BV450-conjugated H-2Kb/SIINFEKL tetramer (OVA-tetramer) was used, obtained from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Tetramer Core Facility. iNKT cells were stained with TCRβ-APC (H57–597), and mCD1d PBS-57 PE tetramer obtained from the NIH tetramer Core Facility, and PD-1-FITC (RMP1–30) was used as additional activation marker.
To detect IFN-γ producing T cells by an intracellular cytokine staining, 2 × 106 spleen cells were transferred in a round bottom 96 well plate (200 μl volume) and ex vivo restimulated with 1 μg/ml of the OVA-derived peptides SIINFEKL (CD8) and ISQAVHAAHAEINEAGR (CD4) or culture medium (no peptide) as control in the presence of a Protein transport Inhibitor Cocktail of Brefeldin A and Monensin (BD Biosciences). Following 37 °C incubation for 5 h, cells were stained for viability and extracellular antigens after blocking Fc binding sites as described before, except for CD3e-PE (145-2C11) which was replaced by TCRβ-APC (H57–597). Cells were then fixed and permeabilized with BDCytoFix/CytoPerm solution (BD Biosciences), intracellular staining using a IFN-ɣ-BV421 or PE antibody (XMG1.2 clone) was performed in perm buffer for 30 min at RT.
4.6. Measurements of mouse ovalbumin binding IgG antibodies and cytokine responses
Whole blood was collected in lithium-heparin coated tubes, centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 5 min to separate plasma, after which samples were stored at −80 °C. Plasma from individual mice were collected two weeks after second vaccination (day 28). The samples were 100, 10.000 or 50.000 times diluted before anti-OVA IgG1 and IgG2c titers were quantified with commercial mouse antibody assay kits (Chondrex, Woodinville, WA, USA), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cytokines were measured in plasma collected 4 h or 24 h after injection of the mRNA. A panel of cytokines, including IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12p70, IL-17A, IL-23, IL-27, MCP-1, IFN-β, IFN-γ, TNF-α, and GM-CSF, was quantified using two multiplex assays (LEGENDplex™ Mouse Inflammation Panel & Th1 helper cytokine panel, Biolegend).
4.7. B16-OVA melanoma model
B16 melanoma cells were lentivirally engineered to express OVA, as described in Ertveldt et al. [42]. These cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM, Sigma-Aldrich) containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS, Life Technologies), 2 mmol l−1 l-glutamine, 100 U ml-1 penicillin, 0.1 mg ml−1 streptomycin, and 0.4 mg ml−1 puromycin (Sigma-Aldrich). Mice were shaved and SC injected with 3 × 105 B16-OVA tumor cells (suspended in PBS) in the flank. Eight days after tumor inoculation, when the lesions were palpable, the mice were randomized in different treatment groups based on tumor volume and vaccinated twice through the IM route with SM-102- or C12–200 LNPs loaded with SP-tOVA-MITD mRNA, in combination with or without αGC. Tumor growth was measured every other day or 2 days using a caliper. Animals were euthanized when the humane endpoint of a tumor volume of 1000mm3 was reached.
4.8. Listeria challenge model
Listeria monocytogenes (EGD BUG600 strain) was grown in brain heart infusion (BHI) medium at 37 °C. After overnight culture, bacteria were subcultured 1:10 in BHI medium for 2 h at 37 °C. Following three times washing with PBS, bacteria were resuspended in PBS at 5 × 105 bacteria per 100 μl or further diluted to doses of 5 x104bacteria per 100 μL for pre-infection controls. Mice were IV infected by tail vein injection. Mice were sacrificed 72 h following infection. After tissue homogenization, Colony Forming Units (CFUs) per organ (liver or spleen) were enumerated by serial dilutions in sterile saline and plating on BHI agar. Both liver and spleen were dissociated using cell strainers and PBS with 2% tween.
4.9. Statistical analysis
Data are presented as scatter-bar plots of individual animal measurements and mean value. All statistical analyses were done in GraphPad Prism 8.01 as specified in the figure captions. Depending on whether the SD between groups could be assumed to be equivalent, either an ordinary ANOVA or a Brown–Forsythe and Welch ANOVA was used. Asterisks indicate statistical significance (*, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001, **** p < 0.0001).
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Sofie Meulewaeter: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Ilke Aernout: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Joke Deprez: Methodology, Data curation. Yanou Engelen: Methodology, Data curation. Margo De Velder: Methodology, Data curation. Lorenzo Franceschini: Writing – review & editing, Resources. Karine Breckpot: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Funding acquisition. Serge Van Calenbergh: Resources. Caroline Asselman: Methodology, Data curation. Katie Boucher: Resources, Methodology. Francis Impens: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources, Funding acquisition. Stefaan C. De Smedt: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Rein Verbeke: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Ine Lentacker: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
R.V., I.L. and S.D.S. are contributors to patent applications no. WO2020058239A1; Therapeutic nanoparticles and methods of use thereof. and no. WO2023209103; Prevention and treatment of infections with intracellular bacteria., together with I.A.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank the NIH Tetramer Core Facility for providing H-2Kb/SIINFEKL tetramer and mCD1d PBS-57 tetramers. R.V. is a postdoctoral fellow of the Research Foundation-Flanders, Belgium (FWO-Vlaanderen; grant number 1275023N). S.M., I.A. and M.D.V. are doctoral fellows from FWO-V (grant numbers 1S73122N, 1S40923N and 1S02723N). This research is supported by funding from FWO-V (grant number G040319N), Kom Op Tegen Kanker (grant number KotK_UGent/2018/11466/l), Ghent University Concerted Research Action (grant numbers BOF21/GOA/033 and BOF24/GOA/015), Ghent University Industrial Research fund (F2020/IOF-StarTT/039), Ghent University Starting Grant (grant number BOF/STA/202209/011), Ghent University-VUB Research Consortium on particle based immunotherapy (05L00215) and support from the Horizon Europe Project BAXERNA 2.0 [101080544].
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Download: Download Word document (878KB)
Supplementary material

Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
[1]
F.P. Polack, S.J. Thomas, N. Kitchin, J. Absalon, A. Gurtman, S. Lockhart, J.L. Perez, G. Perez Marc, E.D. Moreira, C. Zerbini, et al.
Safety and efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19 vaccine
N. Engl. J. Med., 383 (2020), pp. 2603-2615
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[2]
L.R. Baden, H.M. El Sahly, B. Essink, K. Kotloff, S. Frey, R. Novak, D. Diemert, S.A. Spector, N. Rouphael, C.B. Creech, et al.
Efficacy and safety of the mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine
N. Engl. J. Med., 384 (2021), pp. 403-416
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[3]
Moderna
Merck and Moderna Initiate INTerpath-002, a Phase 3 Study Evaluating V940 (mRNA-4157) in Combination with KEYTRUDA® (pembrolizumab) for Adjuvant Treatment of Patients with Certain Types of Resected Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer
https://investors.modernatx.com/news/news-details/2023/Merck-and-Moderna-Initiate-INTerpath-002-a-Phase-3-Study-Evaluating-V940-mRNA-4157-in-Combination-with-KEYTRUDA-pembrolizumab-for-Adjuvant-Treatment-of-Patients-with-Certain-Types-of-Resected-Non-Small-Cell-Lung-Cancer-/default.aspx (2023)
Google Scholar
[4]
Moderna
Merck and Moderna Initiate Phase 3 Study Evaluating V940 (mRNA-4157) in Combination with KEYTRUDA® (pembrolizumab) for Adjuvant Treatment of Patients with Resected High-Risk (Stage IIB-IV) Melanoma
https://investors.modernatx.com/news/news-details/2023/Merck-and-Moderna-Initiate-Phase-3-Study-Evaluating-V940-mRNA-4157-in-Combination-with-KEYTRUDA-pembrolizumab-for-Adjuvant-Treatment-of-Patients-with-Resected-High-Risk-Stage-IIB-IV-Melanoma/default.aspx (2023)
Google Scholar
[5]
BioNTech
BioNTech Receives FDA Fast Track Designation for its FixVac Candidate BNT111 in Advanced Melanoma
https://investors.biontech.de/news-releases/news-release-details/biontech-receives-fda-fast-track-designation-its-fixvac/ (2021)
Google Scholar
[6]
W. Chen
Will the mRNA vaccine platform be the panacea for the development of vaccines against antimicrobial resistant (AMR) pathogens?
Expert Rev. Vaccines, 21 (2022), pp. 155-157
View in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[7]
S. Meulewaeter, Y. Zhang, A. Wadhwa, K. Fox, I. Lentacker, K.W. Harder, P.R. Cullis, S.C. De Smedt, M.H.Y. Cheng, R. Verbeke
Considerations on the design of lipid-based mRNA vaccines against cancer
J. Mol. Biol., 436 (2024)
(Article 168385)
Google Scholar
[8]
J.S. Weber, M.S. Carlino, A. Khattak, T. Meniawy, G. Ansstas, M.H. Taylor, K.B. Kim, M. McKean, G.V. Long, R.J. Sullivan, et al.
Individualised neoantigen therapy mRNA-4157 (V940) plus pembrolizumab versus pembrolizumab monotherapy in resected melanoma (KEYNOTE-942): a randomised, phase 2b study
Lancet, 403 (2024), pp. 632-644
View PDF
View articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[9]
L.M. Kranz, M. Diken, H. Haas, S. Kreiter, C. Loquai, K.C. Reuter, M. Meng, D. Fritz, F. Vascotto, H. Hefesha, et al.
Systemic RNA delivery to dendritic cells exploits antiviral defence for cancer immunotherapy
Nature, 534 (2016), pp. 396-401
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[10]
C. Krienke, L. Kolb, E. Diken, M. Streuber, S. Kirchhoff, T. Bukur, O. Akilli-Ozturk, L.M. Kranz, H. Berger, J. Petschenka, et al.
A noninflammatory mRNA vaccine for treatment of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
Science, 371 (2021), pp. 145-153
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[11]
C. Sittplangkoon, M.G. Alameh, D. Weissman, P.J.C. Lin, Y.K. Tam, E. Prompetchara, T.
Palaga, mRNA vaccine with unmodified uridine induces robust type I interferon-dependent anti-tumor immunity in a melanoma model
Front. Immunol., 13 (2022)
(Article 983000)
Google Scholar
[12]
J. Ramos da Silva, K. Bitencourt Rodrigues, G. Formoso Pelegrin, N. Silva Sales, H. Muramatsu, M. de Oliveira Silva, B. Porchia, A.C.R. Moreno, L. Aps, A.A. Venceslau-Carvalho, et al.
Single immunizations of self-amplifying or non-replicating mRNA-LNP vaccines control HPV-associated tumors in mice
Sci. Transl. Med., 15 (2023)
(Article eabn3464)
Google Scholar
[13]
G. Anderluzzi, G. Lou, S. Woods, S.T. Schmidt, S. Gallorini, M. Brazzoli, R. Johnson, C.W. Roberts, D.T. O'Hagan, B.C. Baudner, Y. Perrie
The role of nanoparticle format and route of administration on self-amplifying mRNA vaccine potency
J. Control. Release, 342 (2022), pp. 388-399
View PDF
View articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[14]
A. Syenina, E.S. Gan, J.Z.N. Toh, R. de Alwis, L.Z. Lin, C.Y.L. Tham, J.X. Yee, Y.S. Leong, H. Sam, C. Cheong, et al.
Adverse effects following anti-COVID-19 vaccination with mRNA-based BNT162b2 are alleviated by altering the route of administration and correlate with baseline enrichment of T and NK cell genes
PLoS Biol., 20 (2022)
(Article e3001643)
Google Scholar
[15]
Y. Temtanakitpaisan, S. Saengnipanthkul, N. Sarakosol, S. Maskasame, S. Mongkon, B. Buranrat, S. Thammawat, S. Patamatamkul, P. Nernsai
Reactogenicity and immunogenicity of the intradermal administration of BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine in healthy adults who were primed with an inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine
Vaccine, X, 12 (2022), Article 100242
View PDF
View articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[16]
R.A. Feldman, R. Fuhr, I. Smolenov, A. Mick Ribeiro, L. Panther, M. Watson, J.J. Senn, M. Smith, H.S. Pujar Almarsson, et al.
mRNA vaccines against H10N8 and H7N9 influenza viruses of pandemic potential are immunogenic and well tolerated in healthy adults in phase 1 randomized clinical trials
Vaccine, 37 (2019), pp. 3326-3334
View PDF
View articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[17]
R. Verbeke, I. Lentacker, K. Breckpot, J. Janssens, S. Van Calenbergh, S.C. De Smedt, H. Dewitte
Broadening the message: a nanovaccine co-loaded with messenger RNA and alpha-GalCer induces antitumor immunity through conventional and natural killer T cells
ACS Nano, 13 (2019), pp. 1655-1669
View in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[18]
H. Kitamura, K. Iwakabe, T. Yahata, S. Nishimura, A. Ohta, Y. Ohmi, M. Sato, K. Takeda, K. Okumura, L. Van Kaer, et al.
The natural killer T (NKT) cell ligand alpha-galactosylceramide demonstrates its immunopotentiating effect by inducing interleukin (IL)-12 production by dendritic cells and IL-12 receptor expression on NKT cells
J. Exp. Med., 189 (1999), pp. 1121-1128
Google Scholar
[19]
L. Brossay, M. Chioda, N. Burdin, Y. Koezuka, G. Casorati, P. Dellabona, M. Kronenberg
CD1d-mediated recognition of an alpha-galactosylceramide by natural killer T cells is highly conserved through mammalian evolution
J. Exp. Med., 188 (1998), pp. 1521-1528
View in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[20]
P.J. Brennan, M. Brigl, M.B. Brenner
Invariant natural killer T cells: an innate activation scheme linked to diverse effector functions
Nat. Rev. Immunol., 13 (2013), pp. 101-117
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[21]
A. Diaz-Basabe, F. Strati, F. Facciotti
License to kill: when iNKT cells are granted the use of lethal cytotoxicity
Int. J. Mol. Sci., 21 (2020)
(Article 3909)
Google Scholar
[22]
H.J. Ko, J.M. Lee, Y.J. Kim, Y.S. Kim, K.A. Lee, C.Y. Kang
Immunosuppressive myeloid-derived suppressor cells can be converted into immunogenic APCs with the help of activated NKT cells: an alternative cell-based antitumor vaccine
J. Immunol., 182 (2009), pp. 1818-1828
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[23]
S. Gebremeskel, D.R. Clattenburg, D. Slauenwhite, L. Lobert, B. Johnston
Natural killer T cell activation overcomes immunosuppression to enhance clearance of postsurgical breast cancer metastasis in mice
Oncoimmunology, 4 (2015)
(Article e995562)
Google Scholar
[24]
C. De Santo, M. Salio, S.H. Masri, L.Y. Lee, T. Dong, A.O. Speak, S. Porubsky, S. Booth, N. Veerapen, G.S. Besra, et al.
Invariant NKT cells reduce the immunosuppressive activity of influenza A virus-induced myeloid-derived suppressor cells in mice and humans
J. Clin. Invest., 118 (2008), pp. 4036-4048
View in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[25]
K.J. Hassett, K.E. Benenato, E. Jacquinet, A. Lee, A. Woods, O. Yuzhakov, S. Himansu, J. Deterling, B.M. Geilich, T. Ketova, et al.
Optimization of lipid nanoparticles for intramuscular administration of mRNA vaccines
Mol. Ther. Nucleic Acids, 15 (2019), pp. 1-11
View PDF
View articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[26]
N. Valiante, T. Zaks, E. Huang, G. Ciaramella
Cancer Vacc., WO2017070618A1 (2017)
Google Scholar
[27]
R. Verbeke, M.J. Hogan, K. Loré, N. Pardi
Innate immune mechanisms of mRNA vaccines
Immunity, 55 (2022), pp. 1993-2005
View PDF
View articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[28]
S. Kreiter, A. Selmi, M. Diken, M. Sebastian, P. Osterloh, H. Schild, C. Huber, O. Tureci, U. Sahin
Increased antigen presentation efficiency by coupling antigens to MHC class I trafficking signals
J. Immunol., 180 (2008), pp. 309-318
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[29]
A. Bonehill, C. Heirman, S. Tuyaerts, A. Michiels, K. Breckpot, F. Brasseur, Y. Zhang, P. Van Der Bruggen, K. Thielemans
Messenger RNA-electroporated dendritic cells presenting MAGE-A3 simultaneously in HLA class I and class II molecules
J. Immunol., 172 (2004), pp. 6649-6657
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[30]
S. Meulewaeter, G. Nuytten, M.H.Y. Cheng, S.C. De Smedt, P.R. Cullis, T. De Beer, I. Lentacker, R. Verbeke
Continuous freeze-drying of messenger RNA lipid nanoparticles enables storage at higher temperatures
J. Control. Release, 357 (2023), pp. 149-160
View PDF
View articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[31]
M. Hamon, H. Bierne, P. Cossart
Listeria monocytogenes: a multifaceted model
Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 4 (2006), pp. 423-434
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[32]
L.A. Zenewicz, H. Shen
Innate and adaptive immune responses to Listeria monocytogenes: a short overview
Microbes Infect., 9 (2007), pp. 1208-1215
View PDF
View articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[33]
E.G. Pamer
Immune responses to Listeria monocytogenes
Nat. Rev. Immunol., 4 (2004), pp. 812-823
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[34]
R.L. Mayer, R. Verbeke, C. Asselman, I. Aernout, A. Gul, D. Eggermont, K. Boucher, F. Thery, T.M. Maia, H. Demol, et al.
Immunopeptidomics-based design of mRNA vaccine formulations against Listeria monocytogenes
Nat. Commun., 13 (2022)
(Article 6075)
Google Scholar
[35]
S. Omo-Lamai, M.E. Zamora, M.N. Patel, J. Wu, J. Nong, Z. Wang, A. Peshkova, A. Majumder, J.R. Melamed, L.S. Chase, et al.
Physicochemical targeting of lipid nanoparticles to the lungs induces clotting: mechanisms and solutions
Adv. Mater. (2024)
(Article e2312026)
Google Scholar
[36]
L.M. Kranz, M. Diken, H. Haas, S. Kreiter, C. Loquai, K.C. Reuter, M. Meng, D. Fritz, F. Vascotto, H. Hefesha, et al.
Systemic RNA delivery to dendritic cells exploits antiviral defence for cancer immunotherapy
Nature, 534 (2016), pp. 396-401
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[37]
J. Schmieg, G. Yang, R.W. Franck, N. Van Rooijen, M. Tsuji
Glycolipid presentation to natural killer T cells differs in an organ-dependent fashion
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 102 (2005), pp. 1127-1132
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[38]
H.J. Bontkes, M. Moreno, B. Hangalapura, J.J. Lindenberg, J. de Groot, S. Lougheed, H.J. van der Vliet, A.J. van den Eertwegh, T.D. de Gruijl, B.M. von Blomberg, R.J. Scheper
Attenuation of invariant natural killer T-cell anergy induction through intradermal delivery of alpha-galactosylceramide
Clin. Immunol., 136 (2010), pp. 364-374
View PDF
View articleView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[39]
A.N. Courtney, P. Thapa, S. Singh, A.M. Wishahy, D. Zhou, J. Sastry
Intranasal but not intravenous delivery of the adjuvant alpha-galactosylceramide permits repeated stimulation of natural killer T cells in the lung
Eur. J. Immunol., 41 (2011), pp. 3312-3322
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[40]
H. Kane, N.M. LaMarche, A. Ni Scannail, A.E. Garza, H.F. Koay, A.I. Azad, B. Kunkemoeller, B. Stevens, M.B. Brenner, L. Lynch
Longitudinal analysis of invariant natural killer T cell activation reveals a cMAF-associated transcriptional state of NKT10 cells
eLife, 11 (2022)
(Article e76586)
Google Scholar
[41]
D. Sag, P. Krause, C.C. Hedrick, M. Kronenberg, G. Wingender
IL-10-producing NKT10 cells are a distinct regulatory invariant NKT cell subset
J. Clin. Invest., 124 (2014), pp. 3725-3740
View in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[42]
T. Ertveldt, S. Meulewaeter, Y. De Vlaeminck, O. Olarte, K. Broos, S. Van Calenbergh, S. Bourgeois, J. Deprez, Y. Heremans, C. Goyvaerts, et al.
Nanobody-mediated SPECT/CT imaging reveals the spatiotemporal expression of programmed death-ligand 1 in response to a CD8(+) T cell and iNKT cell activating mRNA vaccine
Theranostics, 13 (2023), pp. 5483-5500
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[43]
L. Van Kaer, V.V. Parekh, L. Wu
The response of CD1d-restricted invariant NKT cells to microbial pathogens and their products
Front. Immunol., 6 (2015), p. 226
View in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[44]
M. Emoto, T. Yoshida, T. Fukuda, I. Kawamura, M. Mitsuyama, E. Kita, R. Hurwitz, S.H. Kaufmann, Y. Emoto
Alpha-galactosylceramide promotes killing of Listeria monocytogenes within the macrophage phagosome through invariant NKT-cell activation
Infect. Immun., 78 (2010), pp. 2667-2676
View in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[45]
T. Ranson, S. Bregenholt, A. Lehuen, O. Gaillot, M.C. Leite-de-Moraes, A. Herbelin, P. Berche, J.P. Di Santo
Invariant V alpha 14+ NKT cells participate in the early response to enteric Listeria monocytogenes infection
J. Immunol., 175 (2005), pp. 1137-1144
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[46]
M.M. Venkataswamy, A. Baena, M.F. Goldberg, G. Bricard, J.S. Im, J. Chan, F. Reddington, G.S. Besra, W.R. Jacobs Jr., S.A. Porcelli
Incorporation of NKT cell-activating glycolipids enhances immunogenicity and vaccine efficacy of Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guerin
J. Immunol., 183 (2009), pp. 1644-1656
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[47]
M. Ganley, L.E. Holz, J.J. Minnell, M.N. de Menezes, O.K. Burn, K.C.Y. Poa, S.L. Draper, K. English, S.T.S. Chan, R.J. Anderson, et al.
mRNA vaccine against malaria tailored for liver-resident memory T cells
Nat. Immunol., 24 (2023), pp. 1487-1498
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[48]
K. Lam, A. Leung, A. Martin, M. Wood, P. Schreiner, L. Palmer, O. Daly, W. Zhao, K. McClintock, J. Heyes
Unsaturated, trialkyl ionizable lipids are versatile lipid-nanoparticle components for therapeutic and vaccine applications
Adv. Mater., 35 (2023), Article e2209624
Google Scholar
[49]
L.B. Jeffs, L.R. Palmer, E.G. Ambegia, C. Giesbrecht, S. Ewanick, I. MacLachlan
A scalable, extrusion-free method for efficient liposomal encapsulation of plasmid DNA
Pharm. Res., 22 (2005), pp. 362-372
CrossrefView in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cited by (32)
Advancing mRNA vaccines: A comprehensive review of design, delivery, and efficacy in infectious diseases
2025, International Journal of Biological Macromolecules

Show abstract
Clinical development of therapeutic mRNA applications
2025, Molecular Therapy

Show abstract
Lipid-coated gold nanorods for photoimmunotherapy of primary breast cancer and the prevention of metastasis
2024, Journal of Controlled Release
Citation Excerpt :
Lipid-based immune enhancers such as monophosphoryl-lipid A (which removes toxic components from LPS) and α-galactosylceramide (α-GC) are being used in the synthesis of lipid nanoparticles for cancer immunotherapy [33,34]. Compared to other lipid-based immune stimulators, α-GC has a relatively stronger ability to activate the immune system at low concentrations [35–37]. Therefore, it has the potential for use in cancer immunotherapy via lipid-nanoparticles.


Show abstract
Leveraging mRNA technology for antigen based immuno-oncology therapies
2025, Journal for Immunotherapy of Cancer
Technological breakthroughs and advancements in the application of mRNA vaccines: a comprehensive exploration and future prospects
2025, Frontiers in Immunology
Progress and prospects of mRNA-based drugs in pre-clinical and clinical applications
2024, Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy
View all citing articles on Scopus
1
Shared first authors.
© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

Recommended articles
Lipid nanoparticles with prazole adjuvant to enhance the efficacy of mRNA cancer vaccines
Journal of Controlled Release, Volume 383, 2025, Article 113756
Young A Kim, …, Kun Na
View PDF
A Mannosylated peptidyl lipid CManDA doped into cytidinyl/cationic lipids efficiently delivers siG12Ss to lung cancer in vivo
Journal of Controlled Release, Volume 381, 2025, Article 113624
Hua Guo, …, Zhenjun Yang
View PDF
An injectable and active hydrogel induces mutually enhanced mild magnetic hyperthermia and ferroptosis
Biomaterials, Volume 298, 2023, Article 122139
Xiaobin Chen, …, Lin Yu
View PDF

Show 3 more articles
Elsevier logo with wordmark
About ScienceDirect
Remote access
Contact and support
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Cookie settings
All content on this site: Copyright © 2026 Elsevier B.V., its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply.

RELX group home page
Feedback